:toc2:
:doctitle: {_doctitle} - Flows

= Flows

== Creating Flows from Pipe Assemblies

.Creating a new Flow
====
include::simple-flow.adoc[]
====

To create a Flow, it must be planned though one of the
[classname]+FlowConnector+ subclass objects. In Cascading, each platform (i.e.,
local and Hadoop) has its own connectors. The [code]+connect()+ method is used
to create new Flow instances based on a set of sink taps, source taps, and a
pipe assembly. Above is a trivial example that uses the local mode connector.

.Binding taps in a Flow
====
include::complex-flow.adoc[]

<1>The [classname]+FlowDef+ is a fluent API for passing required and optional
meta-data to the [classname]+FlowConnector+.

====

The example above expands on our previous pipe assembly example by creating
multiple source and sink taps and planning a [classname]+Flow+. Note there are
two branches in the pipe assembly - one named "lhs" and the other named "rhs".
Internally Cascading uses those names to bind the source taps to the pipe
assembly.

[[configuring-flows]]
== Configuring Flows

The FlowConnector constructor accepts the [classname]+java.util.Property+ object
so that default Cascading and any platform-specific properties can be passed
down through the planner to the platform at runtime.

NOTE: In the case of Hadoop, any relevant Hadoop configuration properties may be
added. For instance, it's very common to add [code]+mapreduce.job.reduces+ to
set the number of reducers.

When running on a cluster, one of the two properties that must always be set for
production applications is the application Jar class or Jar path.

.Configuring the Application Jar
====
include::flow-properties.adoc[]
====

Since the [classname]+FlowConnector+ can be reused, any properties passed on the
constructor will be handed to all the Flows it is used to create. If Flows need
to be created with different default properties, a new FlowConnector will need
to be instantiated with those properties, or properties will need to be set on a
given [classname]+Pipe+ or [classname]+Tap+ instance directly - via the
[methodname]+getConfigDef()+, [methodname]+getNodeConfigDef()+ or
[methodname]+getStepConfigDef()+ methods.

[[skipping-flows]]
== Skipping Flows

When a [classname]+Flow+ participates in a [classname]+Cascade+, the
[classname]+Flow.isSkipFlow()+ method is consulted before calling
[classname]+Flow.start()+ on the flow. The result is based on the Flow's _skip
strategy_.

By default, [methodname]+isSkipFlow()+ returns true if any of the sinks are
stale - i.e., the sinks don't exist or the resources are older than the sources.
However, the strategy can be changed via the
[classname]+Flow.setFlowSkipStrategy()+ and
[classname]+Cascade.setFlowSkipStrategy()+ method.

Cascading provides a choice of two standard skip strategies:

FlowSkipIfSinkNotStale::

This strategy - [classname]+cascading.flow.FlowSkipIfSinkNotStale+ - is the
default. Sinks are treated as stale if they don't exist or the sink resources
are older than the sources. If the SinkMode for the sink tap is REPLACE, then
the tap is treated as stale.

FlowSkipIfSinkExists::

The [classname]+cascading.flow.FlowSkipIfSinkExists+ strategy skips the Flow if
the sink tap exists, regardless of age. If the [classname]+SinkMode+ for the
sink tap is [code]+REPLACE+, then the tap is treated as stale.

Additionally, you can implement custom skip strategies by implementing the
interface [classname]+cascading.flow.FlowSkipStrategy+.

Note that [classname]+Flow.start()+ does not consult the
[methodname]+isSkipFlow()+ method, and consequently always tries to start the
Flow if called. It is up to the user code to call [classname]+isSkipFlow()+ to
determine whether the current strategy indicates that the Flow should be
skipped.

[[custom-flows]]
== Creating Custom Flows

Any custom Class can be treated as a Flow if given the correct
https://github.com/Cascading/riffle[Riffle] annotations. Riffle is a set of Java
annotations that identify specific methods on a class as providing specific
life-cycle and dependency functionality. For more information, see the Riffle
documentation and examples. To use with Cascading, a Riffle-annotated instance
must be passed to the [classname]+cascading.flow.process.ProcessFlow+
constructor method. The resulting [classname]+ProcessFlow+ instance can be used
like any other Flow instance.

Since many algorithms need to perform multiple passes over a given data set, a
Riffle-annotated Class can be written that internally creates Cascading Flows
and executes them until no more passes are needed. This is like nesting Flows or
Cascades in a parent Flow, which in turn can participate in a Cascade.
