:doctitle: {_doctitle} - Cascades

include::_toc.adoc[]

== Cascades

image:images/cascade.svg[align="center"]

A Cascade allows multiple Flow instances to be executed as a single logical
unit. If there are dependencies between the Flows, they are executed in the
correct order.

Further, Cascade instances act like a compiler build file: a Cascade only
executes Flows that have stale sinks (i.e., output data that is older than the
input data). For more about flows and sinks, see
<<ch06-flows.adoc#skipping-flows,Skipping Flows>>.

=== Creating a Cascade

.Creating a new Cascade
====
include::_simple-cascade.adoc[]
====

When passing Flows to the CascadeConnector, order is not important. The
CascadeConnector automatically identifies the dependencies between the given
Flows and creates a scheduler that starts each Flow as its data sources become
available. If two or more Flow instances have no interdependencies, they are
submitted together so that they can execute in parallel.

If an instance of [classname]+cascading.flow.FlowSkipStrategy+ is given to a
[classname]+Cascade+ instance (via the
[methodname]+Cascade.setFlowSkipStrategy()+ method), it is checked for every
Flow instance managed by that Cascade, and all skip strategies on those Flow
instances are ignored.

[[cascade-scheduler]]
=== The Cascade Topological Scheduler

Cascading has a simple class, [classname]+Cascade+, that executes a collection
of Cascading Flows on a target cluster in dependency order.

The [classname]+CascadeConnector+ class constructs a [classname]+Cascade+ by
building a virtual, internal graph that renders each Flow as a "vertex" and
renders each file as an "edge." As a [classname]+Cascade+ executes, the
processes trace the topology of the graph by plotting each vertex in order of
dependencies. When all incoming edges (i.e., files) of a vertex are available,
it is scheduled on the cluster.

Consider the following example.

* Flow 1 reads input file A and outputs B.
* Flow 2 expects input B and outputs C and D.
* Flow 3 expects input C and outputs E.

In the example above, Flow 1 goes first, Flow 2 goes second, and Flow 3 is last.

If two or more Flows are independent of one another, they are scheduled
concurrently.

By default, if any outputs from a Flow are newer than the inputs, the Flow is
skipped. The assumption is that the Flow was executed recently, since the output
is not stale. So there is no reason to re-execute it and use up resources or add
time to the application. A compiler behaves analogously when a source file is
not updated before a recompile.

The Cascade topological scheduler is particularly helpful when you have a large
set of jobs, with varying interdependencies, that must be executed as a logical
unit. You can just pass the jobs to the CascadeConnector, which can determine
the sequence of flows to uphold the dependency order.
