
:toc2:
:doctitle: {_doctitle} - Configuring

== Configuring

=== Introduction

Cascading provides a number of ways to pass properties down for use by built-in
or custom operations and integrations, to Cascading internals, or down to the
underlying platform.

Additionally the scope of the configuration properties can be application wide,
limited to a <<ch06-flows.adoc#process-level,specific process level>> (a Flow, a
FlowStep, or a FlowNode), or specific to a given Pipe or Tap instance.

=== Creating Properties

Cascading is very configurable. To configure aspects of Cascading, a property
set must be created, where a property is a key and value pair.

The key is a String value like [code]+cascading.app.appjar.path+, and the value
is the String path to the "app jar".

Property sets can be managed directly in a [classname]+java.util.Properties+
instance. This class has methods allowing for [code]+*.property+ files to be
loaded from disk or other locations.

TIP: [classname]+Properties+ is a subclass of [classname]+Map<Object,Object>+,
thus any Map type can be used, so long as both key and value pairs are stored as
type [classname]+java.util.String+,

NOTE: [classname]+Properties+ can be nested via the constructor creating a
hierarchy of default key/values. But calling [code]+getKeySet()+ and other
[classname]+Map+ specific API calls will not return the nested key values. See
[methodname]+Properties.getPropertyNames()+.

==== Props

All frequently used Cascading properties are encapsulated in sub-system specific
[classname]+Props+ sub-classes. All [classname]+Props+ classes are fluent style
interfaces for creating property sets.

For example, the [classname]+AppProps+ class can be used for setting application
level configuration settings.

.Configuring the Application Jar
====
include::app-props.adoc[]
====


The [classname]+Props+ interface allows for both setting available values as
well as populating either a [classname]+Properties+ or [classname]+ConfigDef+
instance for use by Cascading.

There are quite a few "Props" based classes that expose fluent API calls, the
ones most commonly used are below.

|====

| [classname]+cascading.property.AppProps+ | Allows for setting application
specific properties. Some properties are required by the underlying platform,
like application Jar. Others are simple meta-data used by compatible management
tools, like tags.

| [classname]+cascading.flow.FlowConnectorProps+ | Allows for setting a
[classname]+DebugLevel+ or [classname]+AssertionLevel+ for a given FlowConnector
to target. Also allows for setting intermediate [classname]+DecoratorTap+
sub-classes to be used, if any.

| [classname]+cascading.flow.FlowProps+ | Allows for setting any Flow specific
properties like the maximum concurrent steps to be scheduled, or changing the
default Tuple Comparator class.

| [classname]+cascading.flow.FlowRuntimeProps+ | Allows for setting specific
runtime properties, like the level of parallelization to use.

| [classname]+cascading.cascade.CascadeProps+ | Allows for setting any Cascade
specific properties like the maximum concurrent Flows to be scheduled.

| [classname]+cascading.tap.TrapProps+ | Allows for fine grained configuration
of what diagnostic data traps should capture on failures.

| [classname]+cascading.tuple.collect.SpillableProps+ | Allows for fine grained
control over how to manage spilling of data during certain operators that
accumulate data. Specifically thresholds and what compression codecs to use.

| [classname]+cascading.pipe.assembly.AggregateByProps+ | Allows for fine
grained control over the underlying caches used.

|====

=== Passing Properties

The scopes at which properties can be applied are:

* Application - through a default shared [classname]+Properties+ instance

* [classname]+Flow+ - through a Flow specific [classname]+Properties+ instance
passed to the proper [classname]+FlowConnector+

* [classname]+FlowStep+ - through either [methodname]+Pipe.getStepConfigDef()+
or [methodname]+Tap.getStepConfigDef()+

* [classname]+FlowNode+ - through either [methodname]+Pipe.getNodeConfigDef()+
or [methodname]+Tap.getNodeConfigDef()+

* [classname]+Pipe+ - through [methodname]+Pipe.getConfigDef()+

* [classname]+Tap+ - through [methodname]+Tap.getConfigDef()+

In the cases of FlowStep and FlowNode, the Pipe and Tap instances that are
planned into those levels will be inspected for property settings, the union of
which will be applied to the underlying configuration for that level, if
possible

NOTE: FlowNode level properties cannot be applied to the Map/Reduce platform.

==== Planner Properties

Properties passed to a [classname]+FlowConnector+ will be consulted during
planning.

In addition, these properties will be pushed directly to the underlying platform
as defaults. Any of which may be overridden by a given scoped
[classname]+ConfigDef+

==== ConfigDef

The ConfigDef class allows for the creation of a configuration properties
template to be applied to an existing properties configuration set.

There are three property modes, [classname]+Mode.DEFAULT+,
[classname]+Mode.REPLACE+, and [classname]+Mode.UPDATE+.

 * A [classname]+DEFAULT+ property is only applied if there is no existing value
 in the  property set.

 * A [classname]+REPLACE+ property is always applied overriding any previous
 values.

 * An [classname]+UPDATE+ property is always applied to an existing property.
 Usually when the property key represent a list of values.

The following examples show using the [classname]+ConfigDef+. at different
scopes.

.Configuring properties at the FlowStep scope
====
include::properties-step.adoc[]
====

.Configuring properties at the Pipe scope
====
include::properties-pipe.adoc[]
====
