:toc2:
:doctitle: {_doctitle} - Local Platform

[[local-platform]
= Local Platform

[[source-sink]]
== Source and Sink Taps

=== Taps

The following sample code creates a new Hadoop FileSystem Tap that can read and
write raw text files. Since only one field name is provided, the "offset" field
is discarded, resulting in an input tuple stream with only "line" values.

Here are the most commonly-used tap types:

FileTap::

The [classname]+cascading.tap.local.FileTap+ tap is used with the Cascading
local platform to access files on the local file system.

[[debugging]]
== Troubleshooting and Debugging

Debugging and testing in Cascading local mode, unlike Cascading other platforms,
is straightforward as all the processing happens in the local JVM and
in local memory.

This dramatically simplifies the use of an IDE and Debugger.Thus the very first
recommendation for debugging Cascading applications on a given platform is to
first write tests that run in Cascading local mode.

Along with the use of an IDE Debugger, Cascading provides two tools to help sort
out runtime issues. First is the use of the [classname]+Debug+ filter.

It is a best practice to sprinkle [classname]+Debug+ operators (see
<<ch16-operations.adoc#debug-function>>) in the pipe assembly and rely on the
planner to remove them at runtime by setting a [classname]+DebugLevel+.

[classname]+Debug+ can only print to the local console via std out or std error,
thus making it harder for use on distributed platforms, as Operations do not
execute locally but on the cluster side. [classname]+Debug+ can optionally print
the current field names, and a prefix can be set to help distinguish between
instances of the [classname]+Debug+ operation.

Additionally, the actual execution plan for a given Flow can be written out (and
visualized) via the Flow.writeDOT() method. DOT files are simply text
representation of graph data and can be read by tools like GraphViz and Omni
Graffle.

In Cascading local mode, these execution plans are exactly as the pipe
assemblies were coded, except the sub-assemblies are unwound and the field names
across the Flow are resolved by the planner. That is, [code]+Fields.ALL+ and
other wild cards are converted the actual field names or ordinals.

If the [methodname]+connect()+ method on the current [classname]+FlowConnector+
fails, the resulting [classname]+PlannerException+ has a
[methodname]+writeDOT()+ method that shows the progress of the current planner.

For planner related errors that present during runtime when executing a Flow,
see the chapter on <<ch22-query-process-planner.adoc#process-planner,The
Cascading Process Planner>>.
