:doctitle: {_doctitle} - Built-In Operations

include::_toc.adoc[]

== Built-In Operations

[[identity-function]]
=== Identity Function

The [classname]+cascading.operation.Identity+ function is used to "shape" a
tuple stream.

Here are some common patterns that illustrate how Cascading "field algebra"
works. (Note that, in actual practice, some of these example tasks might be
better performed with helper
<<ch17-subassemblies.adoc#subassemblies,subassemblies>> such as
<<ch17-subassemblies.adoc#rename,[classname]+Rename+>>,
<<ch17-subassemblies.adoc#retain,[classname]+Retain+>>, and
<<ch17-subassemblies.adoc#discard,[classname]+Discard+>>.)

Discard unused fields::

Here the arguments of the Identity function are passed as results because the
[code]+Fields.ARGS+ field declaration is coded on the line.

+

include::_identity-discard-fields-long.adoc[]

+

In practice you can omit the field declaration, as [code]+Field.ARGS+ is the
default declaration for the Identity function. You can also omit
[code]+Fields.RESULTS+, as it is the default for the [classname]+Each+ pipe.
Thus, simpler code yields the same result:

+

include::_identity-discard-fields.adoc[]

Rename all fields::

Here Identity renames the incoming arguments. Since Fields.RESULTS is implied,
the incoming Tuple is replaced by the selected arguments and given new field
names as declared on Identity.

+

include::_identity-rename-fields-explicit.adoc[]

+

In the example above, if there were more fields than "ip" and "method," it would
work fine -- all the extra fields would be discarded. But if the same were true
for the next example, the Cascading query planner would fail.

+

include::_identity-rename-fields-long.adoc[]

+

Since [code]+Fields.ALL+ is the default argument selector for the
[classname]+Each+ pipe, it can be left out as shown below. Again, the above and
below examples will fail unless there are exactly two fields in the tuples of
the incoming stream.

+

include::_identity-rename-fields.adoc[]

Rename a single field::

Here we rename a single field and return it, along with an input Tuple field, as
the result. All other fields are dropped.

+

include::_identity-rename-some.adoc[]

Coerce values to specific primitive types::

Here we replace the Tuple String values "status" and "size" with
[classname]+int+ and [classname]+long+ values, respectively. All other fields
are dropped.

+

include::_identity-coerce.adoc[]

+

Or we can replace just the Tuple String value "status" with an [classname]+int+,
while keeping all the other values in the output Tuple.

+

include::_identity-coerce-single.adoc[]

[[debug-function]]
=== Debug Function

The [classname]+cascading.operation.Debug+ function is a utility function
(actually, it's a [classname]+Filter+) that prints the current argument Tuple
to either [code]+stdout+ or [code]+stderr+. Used with one of the
[classname]+DebugLevel+ enum values ([classname]+NONE+,
[classname]+DEFAULT+, or [classname]+VERBOSE+), different debug levels can
be embedded in a pipe assembly.

Nothing from the [classname]+Debug+ output displays on the client side.
[classname]+Debug+ is only useful when testing in an IDE or if the remote logs
are readily available.

=== Sample and Limit Functions

The Sample and Limit functions are used to limit the number of tuples that pass
through a pipe assembly.

Sample::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.filter.Sample+ filter specifies a percentage
of tuples that can pass through a pipe assembly.

Limit::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.filter.Limit+ sets a maximum number of
tuples that can pass through a pipe assembly.

=== Insert Function

The [classname]+cascading.operation.Insert+ function enables insertion of
constant values into the tuple stream. This function is most useful in either of
the following cases:

* A tuple stream is split and one of the branches needs an identifying value.

* A missing parameter or value, such as a date String for the current date,
  needs to be inserted.

=== Text Functions

Cascading includes a number of text functions in the
[classname]+cascading.operation.text+ package.

DateFormatter::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.text.DateFormatter+ function is used to
convert a datestamp to a formatted String. This function expects a
[classname]+long+ value representing the number of milliseconds since January 1,
1970, 00:00:00 GMT/UTC, and formats the output using
[classname]+java.text.SimpleDateFormat+ syntax.

+

include::_text-format-date.adoc[]

+

The example above converts a [classname]+long+ timestamp ("ts") to a date
String.

DateParser::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.text.DateParser+ function is used to convert
a text date-and-time String to a timestamp, using the
[classname]+java.text.SimpleDateFormat+ syntax. The timestamp is a
[classname]+long+ value representing the number of milliseconds since January 1,
1970, 00:00:00 GMT/UTC. By default, the output is a field with the name "ts"
(for timestamp), but this can be overridden by passing a declared Fields value.

+

include::_text-create-timestamp.adoc[]

+

In the example above, an Apache log-style date-time field is converted into a
[classname]+long+ timestamp in UTC.

FieldJoiner::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.text.FieldJoiner+ function joins all the
values in a Tuple with a specified delimiter and places the result into a new
field. (For the opposite effect, use the [classname]+RegexSplitter+ function
that is described below.)

FieldFormatter::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.text.FieldFormatter+ function formats Tuple
values with a given String format and places the result into a new field. The
[classname]+java.util.Formatter+ class is used internally to create a new
formatted String.

=== Regular Expression Operations

RegexSplitter::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.regex.RegexSplitter+ function splits an
argument value based on a regex pattern String. (For the opposite effect, use
the FieldJoiner function that is described above.)

+

Internally, this function uses [classname]+java.util.regex.Pattern.split()+, and
it behaves accordingly. By default, it splits on the TAB character ("\t"). If it
is known that a determinate number of values will emerge from this function, it
can declare field names. In this case, if the splitter encounters more split
values than field names, the remaining values are discarded. For more
information, see [code]+java.util.regex.Pattern.split( input, limit )+.

RegexParser::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.regex.RegexParser+ function is used to
extract a regex-matched value from an incoming argument value. If the regular
expression is sufficiently complex, an [classname]+int+ array may be provided to
specify which regex groups should be returned in which field names.

+

include::_regex-parser.adoc[]

+

In the example above, a line from an Apache access log is parsed into its
component parts. Note that the [classname]+int[]+ groups array starts at 1, not
0. Group 0 is the whole group -- if the first field is included, it is a copy of
"line" and not "ip."

RegexReplace::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.regex.RegexReplace+ function is used to
replace a regex-matched value with a specified replacement value. It can operate
in a "replace all" or "replace first" mode. For more information, see the
Javadoc for the [classname]+java.util.regex.Matcher.replaceAll()+ and
[classname]+java.util.regex.Matcher.replaceFirst()+ methods.

+

include::_regex-replace.adoc[]

+

In the example above, all adjoined white space characters are replaced with a
single space character.

RegexFilter::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.regex.RegexFilter+ function filters a Tuple
stream based on a specified regex value. By default, tuples that match the given
pattern are kept, and tuples that do not match are filtered out. This can be
reversed by setting "removeMatch" to [code]+true+.

+

Also, by default, the whole Tuple is matched against the given regex String (in
tab-delimited sections). If "matchEachElement" is set to [code]+true+, the
pattern is applied to each Tuple value individually. For more information, see
the [classname]+java.util.regex.Matcher.find()+ method.

+

include::_regex-filter.adoc[]

+

The above keeps all lines in which "68." appears at the start of the IP address.

RegexGenerator::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.regex.RegexGenerator+ function generates a
new Tuple for every String (found in an input tuple) that matches a specified
regex pattern.

+

include::_regex-generator.adoc[]

+

In the above example, each "line" in a document is parsed into unique words and
stored in the "word" field of each result Tuple.

RegexSplitGenerator::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.regex.RegexSplitGenerator+ function
generates a new Tuple for every split on the incoming argument value delimited
by the given pattern String.

+

The behavior is similar to the [classname]+RegexSplitter+ function, except that
(assuming multiple matches) [classname]+RegexSplitter+ generates a single Tuple
that may contain multiple values. Another differing characteristic is that
[classname]+RegexSplitGenerator+, as well as [classname]+RegexGenerator+, pass
multiple Tuples, each of which contain only one value.

[[operation-expression]]
=== Java Expression Operations

As of *3.1*, all expression operations have moved to the
[code]+cascading-expression-3.x.y.jar+ JAR.

Cascading provides some support for dynamically-compiled Java expressions to be
used in either [classname]+Functions+ or [classname]+Filters+. This capability
is provided by the Janino-embedded Java compiler, which compiles the expressions
into byte code for optimal processing speed. Janino is documented in detail on
its website: http://www.janino.net/.

This capability allows an Operation to evaluate a suitable one-line Java
expression, such as [code]+$$a + 3 * 2$$+ or [code]+a < 7+, where the variable
values ([code]+a+ and [code]+b+) are passed in as Tuple fields. The result of
the Operation thus depends on the evaluated result of the expression -- in the
first example, a [classname]+Number+, and in the second, a [classname]+Boolean+
value.

ExpressionFunction::

The function [classname]+cascading.operation.expression.ExpressionFunction+
dynamically compiles a String expression when executed, assigning argument Tuple
values to variables in the expression.

+

====
include::_expression-function.adoc[]

<1> Converts all field values to a [classname]+String+
====

+

Above, we return a new String value that contains values from the current Tuple.

ExpressionFilter::

The filter [classname]+cascading.operation.expression.ExpressionFilter+
evaluates a Boolean expression, assigning argument Tuple values to variables in
the expression. If the expression returns [code]+true+, the Tuple is removed
from the stream.

+

include::_expression-filter.adoc[]

+

In this example, every line in the Apache log that does not have a status of
"200" is filtered out. [classname]+ExpressionFilter+ coerces the value into the
specified type if necessary to make the comparison. In this case,
[classname]+ExpressionFilter+ coerces the status String into an
[classname]+int+.

Along with [classname]+ExpressionFilter+ and [classname]+ExpressionFunction+,
either [classname]+cascading.operation.expression.ScriptFilter+ or
[classname]+cascading.operation.expression.ScriptFunction+ can be used when an
expression must be invoked in multiple lines of Java code.

See the relevant Javadoc for details on usage.

=== XML Operations

To use XML Operations in a Cascading application, include the
_cascading-xml-x.y.z.jar_ in the project. When using the
[classname]+TagSoupParser+ operation, this module requires the TagSoup library,
which provides support for HTML and XML "tidying." More information is available
at the TagSoup website: http://home.ccil.org/~cowan/XML/tagsoup/.

XPathParser::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.adoc.XPathParser+ function uses one or more
XPath expressions, passed into the constructor, to extract one or more node
values from an XML document contained in the passed Tuple argument, and places
the result(s) into one or more new fields in the current Tuple. In this way, it
effectively parses an XML document into a table of fields, creating one Tuple
field value for every given XPath expression. The [classname]+Node+ is converted
to a String type containing an XML document. If only the text values are
required, search on the [code]+text()+ nodes or consider using XPathGenerator to
handle multiple [classname]+NodeList+ values. If the returned result of an XPath
expression is a [classname]+NodeList+, only the first [classname]+Node+ is used
for the field value and the rest are ignored.

XPathGenerator::

Similar to XPathParser, the [classname]+cascading.operation.adoc.XPathGenerator+
function generates a new [classname]+Tuple+ for every [classname]+Node+ returned
by the given XPath expression from the XML in the current [classname]+Tuple+.

XPathFilter::

The filter [classname]+cascading.operation.adoc.XPathFilter+ removes a Tuple if
the specified XPath expression returns [code]+false+. Set the removeMatch
parameter to [code]+true+ if the filter should be reversed, i.e., to keep only
those Tuples where the XPath expression returns [code]+true+.

TagSoupParser::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.adoc.TagSoupParser+ function uses the
TagSoup library to convert incoming HTML to clean XHTML. Use the
[code]+setFeature( feature, value )+ method to set TagSoup-specific features,
which are documented on the TagSoup website.

=== Assertions

Cascading stream assertions are used to build robust reusable pipe assemblies.
If desired, they can be planned out of a Flow instance at runtime. For more
information, see <<ch15-advanced.adoc#stream-assertions, Stream Assertions>>.
The following documentation covers the assertions available in the core library.

AssertEquals::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertEquals+ assertion specifies
that the number of values given on the constructor is equal to the number of
argument Tuple values. Each constructor value [code]+.equals()+ its
corresponding argument value.

AssertNotEquals::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertNotEquals+ assertion
specifies that the number of values given on the constructor is equal to the
number of argument Tuple values. Each constructor value is _not_ equal to its
corresponding argument value.

AssertEqualsAll::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertEqualsAll+ assertion
specifies that every value in the argument Tuple [code]+.equals()+ the single
value given on the constructor.

AssertExpression::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertExpression+ assertion
dynamically resolves a given Java expression (see <<operation-expression>>)
using argument Tuple values. Any Tuple that returns [code]+true+ for the given
expression passes the assertion.

AssertMatches::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertMatches+ assertion matches
the given regular expression pattern String agains the entire argument Tuple.
The comparison is made possible by concatenating all the fields of the Tuple,
separated by the TAB character (\t). If a match is found, the Tuple passes the
assertion.

AssertMatchesAll::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertMatchesAll+ assertion
matches the given regular expression pattern String against each argument Tuple
value individually.

AssertNotNull::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertNotNull+ assertion specifies
that every position or field in the argument Tuple is not [code]+null+.

AssertNull::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertNull+ assertion specifies
that every position or field in the argument Tuple is [code]+null+.

AssertSizeEquals::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertSizeEquals+ assertion
specifies a size for the current Tuple in the tuple stream. Size here is the
number of fields in the Tuple, as returned by [code]+Tuple.size()+. Note that
some or all fields may be [code]+null+.

AssertSizeLessThan::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertSizeLessThan+ Assertion
asserts that the current Tuple in the stream has a size less than
([code]+&lt;+) the given size. Size, here, is the number of fields in the
Tuple, as returned by [code]+Tuple.size()+. Note that some or all fields may
be [code]+null+.

AssertSizeMoreThan::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertSizeMoreThan+ assertion
specifies that the current Tuple in the stream has a size greater than
([code]+&gt;+) a given size. Size here is the number of fields in the Tuple, as
returned by [code]+Tuple.size()+. Note that some or all fields may be
[code]+null+.

AssertGroupSizeEquals::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertGroupSizeEquals+ group
assertion specifies the number of items in the current grouping, where "equals"
is indicated with ([code]+==+) before the given size. If a pattern String is
given, only grouping keys that match the regular expression will have this
assertion applied where multiple key values are delimited by a TAB character.

AssertGroupSizeLessThan::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertGroupSizeEquals+ Group
assertion specifies that the number of items in the current grouping is less
than ([code]+&lt;+) the given size. If a pattern String is given, only grouping
keys that match the regular expression will have this assertion applied where
multiple key values are delimited by a TAB character.

AssertGroupSizeMoreThan::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.assertion.AssertGroupSizeEquals+ group
assertion specifies that the number of items in the current grouping is greater
than ([code]+&gt;+) the given size. If a pattern String is given, only grouping
keys that match the regular expression will have this assertion applied where
multiple key values are delimited by a TAB character.

=== Logical Filter Operators

The logical [classname]+Filter+ operators allow you to combine multiple filters
to run in a single Pipe, instead of chaining multiple Pipes together to get the
same logical result.

And::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.filter.And+ [classname]+Filter+ performs a
logical "and" on the results of the constructor-provided [classname]+Filter+
instances. If [methodname]+Filter#isRemove()+ returns [code]+true+ for all of
the given instances, this filter returns [code]+true+.

Or::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.filter.Or+ [classname]+Filter+ performs a
logical "or" on the results of the constructor-provided [classname]+Filter+
instances. If [methodname]+Filter#isRemove()+ returns [code]+true+ for
any of the given instances, this filter returns [code]+true+.

Not::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.filter.Not+ [classname]+Filter+ performs a
logical "not" (negation) on the results of the constructor-provided
[classname]+Filter+ instance. If [methodname]+Filter#isRemove()+ returns
[code]+true+ for the given instance, this filter returns [code]+false+.
Conversely, if [methodname]+Filter#isRemove()+ returns [code]+false+ for the
given instance, this filter returns [code]+true+.

Xor::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.filter.Xor+ [classname]+Filter+ performs a
logical "xor" (exclusive or) on the results of the constructor-provided
[classname]+Filter+ instances. Xor can only be applied to two instances at a
time. It returns [code]+true+ if the two instances have different truth values,
and [code]+false+ if they have the same truth value. If
[methodname]+Filter.isRemove()+ returns [code]+true+ for both, or returns
[code]+false+ for both, this filter returns [code]+false+; otherwise it returns
[code]+true+.

.Combining filters
====
include::_filter-and.adoc[]
====

The example above performs a logical "and" on the two filters. Criteria for both
filters must be met for the data to pass through this one Pipe.

=== Buffers

The [classname]+FirstNBuffer+ [classname]+Buffer+ is provided as an optimized
means to determine the top N elements in a grouping.

FirstNBuffer::

The [classname]+cascading.operation.buffer.FirstNBuffer+ [classname]+Buffer+
returns the first N tuples seen in a given grouping. Unlike the
[classname]+cascading.pipe.assembly.FirstBy+ [classname]+AggregateBy+ and
[classname]+cascading.operation.aggregator.First+ [classname]+Aggregator+,
[classname]+FirstNBuffer+ will stop iterating the available tuples when the top
N condition is met. [classname]+FirstNBuffer+ is used by
<<ch17-subassemblies.adoc#unique,[classname]+cascading.pipe.assembly.Unique+>>.
